>>JAY DYER: Is there a deeper,
hidden, more esoteric meaning
behind the Hollywood films
that we all love to watch?
I'm Jay Dyer.
>>JAY WEIDNER: And
I'm Jay Weidner.
And this is "Hollywood
"Hollywood Decoded".
[THEME MUSIC]
>>DYER: In "Batman Begins",
we have basically a comic book
tale that integrates some
conspiracy stories and Jungian
archetypes.
However, we divided
it up because we
thought that there was so
much in the first one, as well
as the progression
into a lot more complex
and darker subjects
in two and three.
But ultimately, we're going to
see that Christopher Nolan is
able to resolve this trilogy
in a very interesting way.
>>WEIDNER: I agree.
And the Joker, which is the
second episode, "Dark Knight",
the Joker plays
this character who
is the epitome of
chaos without reason.
He's not doing it for money.
He's not doing it for any other
reason than to cause chaos.
And I think that's a
very interesting look
at the current state
of politics and anarchy
and the advocacy of anarchy
that's going on in politics.
And I think that what Nolan is
saying is that we cannot let
these forces get out of control,
or we'll be in big trouble.
>>DYER: Yeah.
It's like the idea, as
we've said, of we're
all familiar with
methodical evil,
planning and doing something
nefarious to get to an end
result for some reason.
That's what we tend to
think of terrorism as,
or the terrorist has some
goal to enact his manifesto
or whatever.
But the Joker doesn't
have any manifestos.
He's not a manifesto
kind of guy.
He's just completely chaotic.
And that's why he's, I
think, a better villain
than the Ra's al Ghul.
>>WEIDNER: I think
he's a great villain,
and played to perfection
by Heath Ledger.
And I think also that this
famous scene in the movie where
he's burning the money,
that kind of shows you, he
doesn't care about
all his money.
>>DYER: Right.
>>WEIDNER: He'll douse it--
>>DYER: And all the
other mob guys, he's
with all the rest of
the mob of Gotham.
And they're like--
>>WEIDNER: They can't
believe what they're seeing.
>>DYER: What are you doing?
Are you burning this money?
>>WEIDNER: Yeah.
And he also is, in some ways,
knowledgeable about humans.
Like he knows that that one
guy is going to be a snitch.
He says, I recognize a
snitch when I see one.
And he's definitely a snitch.
>>DYER: A master of
human psychology.
>>WEIDNER: He is.
And the guy ends up
being the snitch.
And so again the Joker
has some kind of foresight
into the nature of
the human condition.
>>DYER: Now this is
where we're going
to see the sage character,
Michael Caine, the Butler,
trying to explain this
idea to Bruce Wayne.
Bruce Wayne still
doesn't even get this,
that there's chaotic evil.
And he can't figure out
the Joker's modus operandi.
That's why he's
successful, the Joker,
as a villain in this
film, for the most part,
is because there's
no pattern, they
can't figure out
why he's doing this.
What's he after?
What's he want?
And it's Michael Caine's
wisdom that says, you know,
back when I was in
the military, we
were out on whatever mission.
[SPEAKING LIKE MICHAEL CAINE]
And some people
just like to see the
world burn, Master Wayne.
Let's watch that.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- Some men aren't looking for
anything logical, like money.
They can't be bought, bullied,
reasoned or negotiated with.
Some men just want to
watch the world burn.
[END PLAYBACK]
It's almost like the Joker
is the incarnation of a force
here.
He's not a person almost.
He's been almost completely--
he's lost his conscience,
he's almost possessed, in a way.
He's like the ultimate double
archetype, if you will.
>>WEIDNER: Well, he
is the apocalypse.
And again, Nolan uses
tarot cards in this movie.
The Joker, of, course, is the
only tarot card that actually
made it into our 52-card deck.
>>DYER: Playing cards, right.
That's a good point.
>>WEIDNER: Playing cards.
It's the only one
that made it over.
And of course, it's the fool.
The Joker is the fool.
And in the end of the movie when
he finally captures the Joker,
of course, he goes into
the hanging man pose, which
is also from the tarot card.
But also in this movie,
which I really like,
is the Joker is
uncontrolled chaos.
And he wants to prove to
Batman, and to Gotham,
that he can take and turn
this place into chaos,
and the people will
willingly do it.
>>DYER: Exactly.
>>WEIDNER: But we
also have free choice.
And we choose, in the
movie they choose,
no, we're not going to play
your manipulating game,
we're not going
to kill each other
because you want us to do it.
And it isn't Batman
that stops the Joker,
it's actually the
people of Gotham
who decide they're not going
to play the game anymore.
>>DYER: Yeah.
This is where we get that
duality where Nolan's always
playing with the idea of
black and white, good and evil
and the idea that the Joker
tries to sell to Batman.
And you get the impression
for a couple of scenes
that he almost kind of
convinces Bruce Wayne of this.
Because he's like,
you're more like me
than you are any of them.
We know what's going on.
We know how the
world really works.
We understand human psychology.
The rest of these
people don't care.
They're willingly going along
with what I'm proposing,
all of my mass media
terror-- because he's
been sending these videos of
him threatening everybody.
And so the only one
that has any gumption
to stand up against him, the
Joker argues, is his twin.
He's like, you complete me.
It's like this Jerry
Maguire type moment,
like you complete
me, or whatever.
So let's watch that scene
where the Joker tries
to convince him.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- You've changed things forever.
- Then why do you
want to kill me?
- [HIGH PITCHED LAUGH] I
don't want to kill you.
What would I do without you?
Go back to ripping
off mob dealers?
No, no.
No.
No, you, you complete me.
- You're garbage.
Who kills for money.
- Don't talk like one of them.
You're not.
Even if you'd like to be.
To them, you're just a freak.
Like me.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>DYER: So he's really
trying to win him over here.
It's like the Joker's
apologetic methodology
to convince you to
convert to Jokerism.
Now he's not
ultimately successful,
but what I think almost
convinces Batman, maybe
a little bit, is precisely
because in the secret society
initiation that
Batman went through
to become Batman, his alter ego,
he had to absorb the dark side.
He had to face up to his demons.
Now he's got a new demon he's
got to face up to, the Joker.
And he's thinking maybe, do I
have to also kind of integrate
this chaotic evil into myself?
But you can't really do that.
You can't integrate chaos into
your persona, I don't think.
And that's why I see these
two villains as the kind of--
if you go back to Nietzsche,
he wrote a famous work
on how there's
Apollonian religion
and Dionysian religion.
And Apollonian religion
is characterized
by the sun and the logos
and reason and order.
This is in Plato's
"Republic", essentially.
Dionysian religion
is just chaos.
It's like bombing your mind
on drugs and going nuts.
And Nietzsche saw these
two forces as always
in competition.
And that's what we see in this
film is those two archetypes.
>>WEIDNER: Yeah.
And then later, we're
introduced to Harvey Dent,
who is Two-Face.
And again, we get this duality
that Nolan is obsessed with,
the idea that the Joker and
Batman are two edges of--
two sides of the same coin.
And then Harvey
Dent actually does
get seduced by the
Joker's madness.
And then Batman has
to act as if he's
the bad guy in order
for Harvey Dent's memory
to be remembered in a good
way, as not a bad man,
but a good man.
>>DYER: A lot of this film
deals with dissociation.
And that's what happens to
Harvey Dent through his trauma.
And I think he loses his lover
and he's burned, and he's got--
and he literally
has two pers-- he's
a Jekyll-Hyde kind of thing.
And so when we look at the
technocrats and the dark side
and what they try to do through
the fear is cause dissociation.
A lot of the Pentagon writers
actually talk about that.
Michael Aquino talks about that.
You cause dissociation in
the public through fear.
And that's why the
theme of this series
is overcoming fear through
integrating and/or opposing
or overcoming the dark
side of ourselves.
A lot of times, it's not just
the bad guy out there, I think.
What Nolan's trying to tell us
is that just like Harvey Dent,
we're all kind of Harvey
Dent's, in a way, because we
have a dark side, too.
And are we going to let
that dark side rule us?
>>WEIDNER: Yeah.
And again, is it Batman,
Bruce Wayne, Two-Face?
You've got the Joker.
Who is the Joker?
Where did he come from?
And he doesn't
really ever answer
a lot of these questions.
But you can clearly see
that Bruce Wayne has become
more confident in
this show than,
in the second one, than
he was in the first.
He's starting to kind
of take over things,
and he's starting
to show off, which
Michael Caine, who's
really consciousness,
representing the
consciousness of Batman,
he says, you know,
you've got to pull back,
you're going too far.
And by the time the
third one, Michael Caine
cuts out completely because
Bruce Wayne's literally
lost it.
And he's going to do anything
he can to stop Bane, the master
criminal.
And so I think in the
end, the Joker, he loses.
Because the humans in
Gotham do not play his game.
And again, that's that duality.
You're prisoners on these ships.
And he wants them
to kill each other.
And they won't do it.
And the lead prisoner is the
toughest alpha male of all,
he throws the bomb
out the window.
He says, I don't know why
you didn't do that earlier.
So even the criminals
have a consciousness
that the Joker does not have.
And the Joker is so
outraged that his plan
didn't work that he
becomes the hanging man.
>>DYER: Exactly.
That's where we're going
to look at this clip that
shows that duality with
Harvey Dent and Two-Face.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
[END PLAYBACK]
So here we have the
clear presentation
of the duality
symbolism, with the coin.
And we think of
Janus, right, Janus
is the two-faced god, the god
of thresholds and doorways
to the Romans, which would
signify that duality.
And again, it's just so
prevalent in this series
that you can't escape
talking about it.
>>WEIDNER: No.
It's what the series is about
is Jungian archetypes of good
and evil and darkness and light.
And a lot of the alchemy
symbols are kind of
reflected in the imagery
that Nolan is doing.
The [? negredo ?]
is the darkness.
And Batman is constantly
coming out of the darkness,
emerging out of darkness.
He's playing with
visual archetypes
all through the series that
are really quite advanced.
I'm not sure what Christopher
Nolan's background is, as far
as how he began to understand
these psychological states.
But he clearly does.
>>DYER: It's interesting
that he's the Dark Knight.
You mention that vigilantism.
And that's-- all of the main
characters end up being kind
of vigilantes.
They're on their own.
They realize that the
system has sold them a lie.
It's not what it
pretended to be.
The cops are corrupt.
So it's almost like the main
players are all on their own.
>>WEIDNER: Well, they are.
In the third one,
Commissioner Gordon,
deliciously played
by Gary Oldman,
that's what he has to do.
He has to not cooperate
with his own police force
because he can't
trust anybody anymore.
And he has that
great line, "You're
a detective now, there's no
such things as coincidences."
And I think that that
is exactly right.
There really is no such
thing as a coincidence.
If something happens, it
happened for a reason.
>>DYER: Well, look
at Harvey Dent.
I think wasn't he
running for commissioner?
So he had some political
role he was trying to get.
And he's corrupted.
So I mean, you have this
visual marring of his visage
that I think is symbolic for,
every area and layer of Gotham
is in some way
kind of blackmailed
or corrupted or co-opted.
And so there's this
battle between the Joker,
the vigilante over
here, and Batman,
the vigilante over here, for
the heart and soul of Gotham.
And again, it's all an allegory
for modern civilization,
for all of us, and
for individuals,
and which way are we
going to go with our life.
>>WEIDNER: Yeah.
And Harvey Dent
also, when he first
introduced to Bruce
Wayne, he's clearly
implying that he
wants vigilantism.
And you can see Bruce Wayne
kind of going, yeah, yeah, yeah,
I like this guy.
But he's a politician, which
means he's a two-faced guy.
And that's what that all means.
So at the end, he becomes
the evil that he always was.
>>DYER: I think being two-faced,
that's a great archetype
for a politician.
>>WEIDNER: It is.
It is.
>>DYER: That's great.
You know, on the way here,
I was reading two books.
One on, like I said,
Stanislavski's method acting,
and another book on
surrealism and film.
And many of the early
surrealists actually said--
and I think Nolan is influenced
by both noir and surrealism--
and the surrealism
is the dream state.
And that's what Nolan is
constantly dealing with,
especially in movies
like "Inception",
is the dream state.
But for people who are
victims of mind control,
they talk about being
in a dream state.
And if they're drugged,
they're presumably
like they're in a dream state.
So the reason I bring that up
is that that is an undercurrent
in Nolan's films.
I think he is speaking
directly to the subconscious.
He's, again, manipulating
the archetypes.
I'm not saying he's
doing it intentionally.
I'm just saying that the
archetypes he's using
are so powerful, like we said,
like Jack Nicholson warned
Heath Ledger about the
Joker archetype, that's
why they're in the tarot
deck, they're archetypes.
They're so powerful that if you
present them in a certain way,
you don't know what you might
trigger, especially for people
out in the population that are
immersed in fantasy worlds.
They've lost their identity and
connection to the real world,
to the here and the now.
They completely live in video
games or something synthetic.
And so they can almost
unintentionally maybe
be programmed by
this kind of stuff.
>>WEIDNER: I agree.
And I would hope that
Christopher Nolan would
explore this in further films.
Because his filmmaking
is so powerful,
his art form, he's
such a great artist.
And again, he's casting
this as a dream.
Batman only goes out at night,
when everybody's dreaming.
And he's a dreamlike
character, a scary character,
to criminals.
And he does that on purpose.
And he can come and go
at will, almost like he's
a supernatural character.
And this is all being
consciously done by Nolan.
And as we lead into the third
of the series, the final,
we have the character Bane.
And Bane is this creature
from the underworld who comes
to the surface for revenge.
And we're never really
clear what the revenge is
or why he's angry at the world.
But we find out that
Bane is not really
the villain of the
third installment.
It's really Marion Cotillard.
And she's playing
this person who
is only working for humanity.
And she wonders why Bruce
Wayne won't donate more money
to her cause and everything.
And Bruce Wayne takes
her in, only to find out
that actually she's a super
villain who actually stabs him
in the back, literally.
>>DYER: Exactly.
Yeah, Bane represents
syndicalism,
eastern Marxist
communist syndicalism,
and even anarchism.
That's his method.
He says that he's here to
destroy capitalism, destroy
the West, to destroy
the stock market.
If you remember, he stages
that kind of false flag type
event on the stock market.
And then he's going to bomb the
Super Bowl and all this kind
of stuff.
So he's supposed to
be the representation
of the terrorists,
of our darkest fears
of some amorphous creature
out of the east who comes,
and he's going to destroy our
way of life, a bin Laden type
character.
But again, he's a
syndicalist, which
is interesting
because Bruce Wayne is
the anarcho-capitalist.
And here we have the
anarcho-syndicalist.
And these are dialectics
that I think have actually
been used in history.
They're not real battles
between two opposing forces.
They are maybe at
the ground level.
But the foundations of the
people that control these two
movements, I think,
are also really run
by big money and foundations.
>>WEIDNER: Well, they are.
And another thing that he
does in the third episode,
Christopher Nolan does
in the third episode,
is he presents a strangely
patriotic view of America.
It's one of the most
odd things, probably,
I've ever seen in
cinema in years,
in which he has the little
boy, before the Super Bowl,
sing the entire first verse
of the national anthem.
But he has a British accent.
So it's very odd
and disconcerting
to hear a little
British kid singing
the American national anthem.
And of course, it's
a football field
and the players are
wearing opposite clothing.
And he blows up
the football field
with the player running
away from the explosion.
And it's pure Americana
that Bane wishes to destroy.
And he's clearly anti-American,
anti-Gotham, in this state,
in this movie.
But clearly, this is almost a
patriotic homage to America,
in a weird way.
>>DYER: It is.
And a lot of what Bane
says in his speech,
it actually kind of rings true.
It's almost like,
you know, maybe we
are given over to
consumerism and we
have no meaning in our
lives because everything
is a commodity.
But the character of
Bane is interesting
because he is at the
same level of Batman.
And it's only really Bane
who throughout the series
says that, we are
both initiated.
They're both part
of the same sect.
Because he was in Ra's
al Ghul's secret society.
So they're at the same
level, if you will,
of ritual initiation
or whatever.
And that's why Bane is the most
difficult villain for Batman
to overcome, because it's really
the closest reflection to him.
Because Bane was in that
prison for a long time,
in the same way that
Bruce Wayne's character
was in prison for a while
in the first installment.
So we're going to look at that
clip now, we are initiated.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- Theatricality and
deception, powerful agents
to the uninitiated.
But we are initiated,
aren't we, Bruce?
You fight like a younger
man, with nothing held back.
It's admirable, but mistaken.
Oh, you think
darkness is your ally.
You merely adopted the dark.
I was born in it, molded by it.
I didn't see the light
until I was already a man.
By then it was nothing
to me but blinding!
[END PLAYBACK]
>>WEIDNER: So he
grew up in the dark.
So darkness can no longer affect
his fears, is what he's saying.
>>DYER: He says,
you appropriated
the light later in your life.
I was born in the dark.
It molded me.
So he is a creation of
the darkness itself.
He wants to be the
embodiment, the incarnation
of the League of Shadows.
>>WEIDNER: And he almost
succeeds in defeating Batman.
And Batman, of course, is
being initiated in this scene.
He's starting to realize
that he's old, that he
can't fight like he used to.
Bane brings that up.
And then Batman,
after this scene,
Batman descends
into his own hell
realm, where he
goes to the prison
that Bane had been in for years.
And then Batman goes
through his own initiation,
where he begins to realize
that he cannot defeat being
physically, but he can become
strong psychologically and then
defeat Bane with
psychological methods,
plus his physical methods.
And he becomes
stronger and stronger,
climbs out of the
hull, into the light,
and goes back to Gotham
for the final battle.
>>DYER: And here's the battle
of the two Ubermensches, right?
Who's going to be
the real Ubermensch?
And it's, again,
the presentation
of the Apollonian
and the Dionysian
that we saw with the Joker.
Bane is another
representation, in a way,
of that Dionysian side of being.
It's like he's not afraid
of anything dark or bad.
He wants to be
beyond good and evil.
That's the great
dictum of Nietzsche.
And so he argues that because
he is pure evil, pure blackness
and darkness, he's beyond
the duality that's in Batman.
Because Batman still
has this conscience,
but he also has
integrated his dark side.
And it almost wins.
But it doesn't succeed.
And the other thing that
I found really interesting
about this film, that
most people didn't catch,
is that towards
the end, you'll see
there's a reading from
Charles Dickens, Two Cities,
"Tale of Two Cities".
And that's actually about
the French Revolution.
So we know then that
Bane is supposed
to represent
anarcho-syndicalism, which
is set against, in a dialectic,
against anarcho-capitalism,
Bruce Wayne.
So I just found, again,
so many representations
of duality and dialectical
tensions throughout the film.
But we do get the idea that
maybe Joseph Gordon-Levitt
is now the new Batman, to
replace the aging Bruce
Wayne as some sort of
dynastic succession, perhaps.
>>WEIDNER: Yeah,
that's the impression
he leaves with you, that
that's what's going to happen.
And he comes up into
the manor there.
And it should be noted
that Michael Caine, who's
the consciousness
of Bruce, really,
he abandons him in this movie.
Because he thinks that
Wayne has gone-- or Batman
has gone way too far
into what he's doing
and it will end
up destroying him.
And Batman fakes his death
to get out of being Batman,
to get out of the
role of being Batman.
And I think there's a lot of
truth, especially in Hollywood,
of people who've accepted
a deal with the devil
and then fake their deaths
to get out of that deal.
And Batman is tired of it.
He's had it.
He gave over to this woman his
company, and she backstabs him.
Everybody has
turned against him.
It's Batman against the world.
In the whole movie, it's
Batman against the world,
on the third installment.
And you can see that
he's just had it.
And he wants to
leave and get out.
And he does.
>>DYER: The film shows
that, the whole series shows
that in a profound way,
just how the entire city can
be controlled
through archetypes,
and of course, maybe
a little chemical
additive, too, to the side.
But it's really only the people
who've mastered the philosophy,
the philosopher
kings-- here we're back
to Plato's Republic--
and the heads of these
secret societies,
Ra's al Ghul, Bane,
Batman, they are the ones
who understand the philosophy
that society is not moved
by political causes really.
Yes, there's a lot
of political causes.
But the film shows those
to actually be fraudulent.
>>WEIDNER: They are.
They're facades.
>>DYER: You can't trust
those mass marketed
causes that are out there.
They're not really
there for your benefit.
Most of the time those are
there for somebody else
using you as a tool, especially
in the political realm,
with these political
revolutions and so forth.
And that's why we have the
references all the way back
to the French Revolution,
which, I believe,
if you read Carroll
Quigley, his massive tome,
"Tragedy and Hope",
actually talks
about the French Revolution
being sparked by bankers.
>>WEIDNER: Yes, it was.
>>DYER: So again, we can't
trust those kind of ground level
revolutions.
Even Bane himself, I
think, was probably
in some degree manipulated.
Because Bane even says that
I am a creation of what
you have done in the West.
You Westerners, with your
capitalist imperialism,
actually screwed up my
village and where I'm from.
And you created me.
I am your dark side.
I've come to haunt you.
Exactly what Ra's al Ghul said,
I'm going to restore balance,
I'm going to take you down
because you've become corrupt.
And I like the fact
that when Bane almost
succeeds in his revolution, he's
basically created this anarcho
revolution throughout
Gotham, it actually
makes Gotham worse than
before with Batman.
So that's that kind of
conservative element to it.
>>WEIDNER: Yeah.
It's very interesting that
Nolan would put that in.
Because Bane almost wins.
And Batman has to face
the fact that even
he was fooled by the politics.
And I think that's
when he gives up.
I think when he kind of gives
up the ghost of the game right
when he realizes that even he
can be fooled by these things.
>>DYER: He realizes that
he would have become Bane.
He was that close
to becoming-- very
close to becoming the Joker.
Now he's close to becoming Bane.
They're from the
same secret society.
He was going to be this
destroyer, because there's
the temptation that,
man, I'm trying
to help all these people, just
like Socrates leaves the cave
and he comes back, and when
he tries to enlighten them,
they all want to kill him.
So Bruce Wayne is
tempted with that.
And that's when I
think he finally
realizes that I've done
the good that I can do,
it's time for me to
retire and hand the baton
on to Joseph Gordon-Levitt.
>>WEIDNER: And then
there's a great scene
where Anne Hathaway
and Bruce Wayne are
dancing at this party.
And Anne Hathaway is
explaining her motivations
about how you rich
live in your houses
and you think the
societies can go on and on
and that you'll be
the masters of it.
But I'm here to tell you that
there's another force at work
here, and I support that force.
And we're going to take
you out, essentially, is
what she's saying, we're going
to take all you rich people
out.
And that is the
story of this movie
is the anarchic forces trying
to remove the wealthy people.
And Bruce Wayne is
not really defending--
>>DYER: It's like
occupy Wayne Manor.
>>WEIDNER: It is,
And I really like the
Anne Hathaway character
in this movie.
I think she's great.
>>DYER: But it's just like
the French Revolution,
in that if you read the story
of what went down, Robespierre,
one of the main guys
early on, he's going
to make everything better.
He's going to get rid
of those nasty rich guys
and he's going to
make it all equal.
And what happens?
You get committee
of public safety
chopping off the heads of
tens of thousands of people.
So it's a bloodbath.
That's exactly what
happens with Bane.
>>WEIDNER: That's right
>>DYER: There's a scene where
you actually see this kind
of Robespierrean image of this
guy at the top of this mountain
of junk and trash, and he's
just up there like deciding who
loses their head--
>>WEIDNER: Isn't that scarecrow?
>>DYER: I think it is.
It's the Cillian
Murphy character.
>>WEIDNER: And it's
directly taken from--
>>DYER: It's Robespierre.
>>WEIDNER: He's Robespierre.
He's executing everyone
that's against him.
And exactly what happened
in the French Revolution.
And really, I think he evoked
kind of the freaky frightened,
the frightfulness, that being
in a helpless situation where
you plead guilty, you're
dead, you plead innocent,
you're dead.
There's no way out.
And that really is what happened
in the French Revolution.
>>DYER: Exactly.
>>WEIDNER: And I think
Nolan is afraid of that
happening here in this country.
I think that that is the
explicit message of number
three is that we cannot
allow this kind of anarchy,
this Robespierre type French
Revolution to come to this
country.
It's a warning.
And I think it's a good warning.
Because we are veering
towards that kind of chaos,
I think, in a lot of ways.
>>DYER: Yeah.
I mean, we're the ones that
export color revolutions
to all these other countries.
And we're naive to think that
Bane's color revolution won't
come back on us.
>>WEIDNER: That's right.
And that's what
he's trying to say.
A very conservative
message, in a weird way.
What you have to understand
is that Christopher Nolan's
a dual citizen.
So he has got that kind of
love of America, I think,
that only a
foreigner could have.
Oh, then he comes here and all
the vibrancy that he sees here.
So I think he's
actually playing out
some of his own views,
points of view of America.
And he thinks maybe
we're a little bit
like spoiled children
who really don't
appreciate what we've got.
>>DYER: My takeaway
is just simply
that the trilogy is about
the individual taking
responsibility for his
actions and not waiting
for some external savior.
It's about growing past
childish political causes that
are idealistic and not reality.
And I think that
Nolan is telling us
that we have to
be like Batman, we
have to be willing to undergo
our own initiation to where
we're not subjected to our
fears, we're beyond that,
we can control ourselves.
Self-control is really
what this is about.
And that's why Batman
ends up retiring.
But I think he's going to
have a good retirement,
you know what I mean?
>>WEIDNER: Well,
he learned a lot.
Learned a lot about the
human condition, which
is really what initiation is.
It's learning a lot
about who you really are
and what the world
is really like.
And that's what happens
in the, especially
the third installment,
tired, old Batman
realizes that actually
he can still be taken
and that he's not the
man he thought he was.
And he grows from
that experience.
>>DYER: Accepting
the reality and not
falling into fantasy worlds and
being manipulated by illusions,
is the positive take
away of this movie.
>>WEIDNER: That's right.
>>DYER: Join us again next
time on "Hollywood Decoded".
I'm Jay Dyer.
>>WEIDNER: And I'm Jay Weidner.
Thanks for watching.
[THEME MUSIC]